Add Support for Wide Gamut (DisplayP3) Colors to React Native (#1)
ryanlntn/discussions-and-proposals: proposals/0000-add-support-for-css-color-function.md

---

> title: Add support for CSS color() function

Reviewer: Do you want to make three different proposals (JS, iOS and Android) or do you want to do a single one?
I'd probably would like to have a single proposal with the whole picture.

In that case, it is better to name the RFC something like: `[RFC] Add Support for Wide Gamut (DisplayP3) Colors to React Native`

Author: We definitely want a single proposal. Thanks for the suggestion! 😄

author:
  - Ryan Linton
  - Yulian Glukhenko
date: 2023-11-20
---

# RFC0000: Add support for CSS color() function

## Summary

> React Native does [not currently support](https://github.com/facebook/react-native/issues/41517) wide color gamut color spaces (i.e. display-p3). This proposal discusses adding support for the CSS color() function enabling support for additional wide-gamut color spaces.

Reviewer: out of curiosity from a non-english first-language speaker: is it more correct _wide gamut color_ or _wide color gamut_? 🤔 

From a stranger perspective, _wide_ is attribute of _gamut_, so I would spell that as _wide gamut_ colors, but I might be completely wrong here! 😅

```suggestion
React Native does [not currently support](https://github.com/facebook/react-native/issues/41517) wide gamut color spaces (i.e. display-p3). This proposal discusses adding support for this color space in React Native, covering:
- JS implementation
- platform changes
```

Author: I believe you're correct that _wide gamut color_ is ___more___ correct than _wide color gamut_. I've seen it used pretty interchangeably but I suppose  _wide gamut color_ would be more correct if you're referring to a color while _wide color gamut_ would still make sense if you're referring to the gamut.

## Basic example

> 

Reviewer: I would add some descriptive text. Also, I would mention that we are choosing this syntax because it is the standard proposed by w3c (todo: add links to the specs)

```js
StyleSheet.create({
  backgroundColor: "color(display-p3 1 0.5 0)",
  color: "color(display-p3 1 0.5 0 / .5)",
});

> ```

Reviewer: Should we also handle inline styles?
```jsx
<View style={{backgroundColor:color(display-p3 1 0.5 0)}} />
```

I think we should, and it should be an easy extension. Thoughts?

Author: Oh definitely. I'll add it to the example.

## Motivation

Since most new devices support wider gamut color spaces, React Native should support them as well. The Display P3 color space has had native support since Android 8.0 and iOS 9.3. The color() function was introduced with [CSS Color Module Level 4](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-color/#color-function), much of which is already implemented in React Native. Also Flutter [recently added support](https://github.com/flutter/flutter/issues/55092) for Display P3 on iOS with plans to follow up with support for Android and then the framework itself.

> 

Reviewer: I would add a line on how this can increase the quality of React Native apps and how this is aligned to the React Native mission of providing the same Look and Field of the native platforms.

## Detailed design

### JS Changes

1. Parse the color() function in [normalizeColor](https://github.com/facebook/react-native/blob/63213712125795ac082597dad2716258b90cdcd5/packages/normalize-color/index.js#L235)

```js

> const COLOR_SPACE = /display-p3|srgb/

Reviewer: does the `color` function force you to specify the color space or assume some default?

Author: It forces you to specify a [predefined color space](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#color-function). When I try `background: color(0,0,1)` in Chrome I get "invalid property value".

function getMatchers() {
  if (cachedMatchers === undefined) {
    cachedMatchers = {
      color: new RegExp(
        'color(' +
          call(COLOR_SPACE, NUMBER, NUMBER, NUMBER) +
          '|' +
          callWithSlashSeparator(COLOR_SPACE, NUMBER, NUMBER, NUMBER, NUMBER) +
          ')'
      ),
```

2. Include the color space in the return value of [StyleSheet processColor](https://github.com/facebook/react-native/blob/63213712125795ac082597dad2716258b90cdcd5/packages/react-native/Libraries/StyleSheet/processColor.js) and [Animated processColor](https://github.com/facebook/react-native/blob/main/packages/react-native/Libraries/Animated/nodes/AnimatedColor.js)

```js
return { ["display-p3"]: true, r, g, b, a };
```

### iOS Changes

> 1. Update [RCTConvert](https://github.com/facebook/react-native/blob/781b637db4268ad7f5f3910d99ebb5203467840b/packages/react-native/React/Base/RCTConvert.m#L881) to handle setting new color values for color space. If color space is not included preserve existing behavior.

Reviewer: could be helpful to introduce a factory function:
```objc
enum ColorSpace: NSInteger {
  case sRGB = 0
  case displayP3 = 1
};

+ (UIColor *) createColorFrom:(CGFloat)red green:(CGFloat)green blue:(CGFloat)blue alpha:(CGFloat)alpha andColorSpace:(ColorSpace)colorSpace 
{
  if (colorSpace == displayP3) {
    return [UIColor colorWithDisplayP3Red:...];
  }
  return [UIColor red:...];
}
```
Can also be a UIColor category!

This should allow us to centralize where colors are created.
Of course, we need to find which pod is used by the three conversion files and include it from there.

2. Update [RCTConversions](https://github.com/facebook/react-native/blob/16ad818d21773cdf25156642fae83592352ae534/packages/react-native/React/Fabric/RCTConversions.h#L37) to handle setting new color values for color space. If color space is not included preserve existing behavior.

3. Update [RCTTextPrimitivesConversions](https://github.com/facebook/react-native/blob/ac1cdaa71620d5bb4860237cafb108f6aeae9aef/packages/react-native/ReactCommon/react/renderer/textlayoutmanager/platform/ios/react/renderer/textlayoutmanager/RCTTextPrimitivesConversions.h#L116) to handle setting new color values for color space. If color space is not included preserve existing behavior.

```objc
[UIColor colorWithDisplayP3Red:components.red green:components.green blue:components.blue alpha:components.alpha]

> ```

Reviewer: You need to explain in a little bit more details which changes you are going to make.
Just reporting the constructor is not enough.

You don't have to show all the code changes, but let's take part of one of those Conversions and show how it will be updated.

### Android Changes

1. Enable the wide color gamut in [ReactActivity](https://github.com/facebook/react-native/blob/7625a502960e6b107e77542ff0d6f40fbf957322/packages/react-native/ReactAndroid/src/main/java/com/facebook/react/ReactActivity.java#L22) if available.

```java
Window window = getWindow();
boolean isScreenWideColorGamut = window.getDecorView().isScreenWideColorGamut()
if (isScreenWideColorGamut) {
  window.setColorMode(PixelFormat.COLOR_MODE_WIDE_COLOR_GAMUT)
}

> ```

Reviewer: If this is a change we apply to all the `ReactActivity`, you have to explain in this RFC why it will not cause harm to the existing code that uses only sRGB values.
Always assume that your readers have no idea how things works.

2. Update [ColorUtil](https://github.com/facebook/react-native/blob/a6964b36294c3bfea09c0cdd65c5d0e3949f2dae/packages/react-native/ReactAndroid/src/main/java/com/facebook/react/views/view/ColorUtil.java#L17) and [ColorPropConverter](https://github.com/facebook/react-native/blob/781b637db4268ad7f5f3910d99ebb5203467840b/packages/react-native/ReactAndroid/src/main/java/com/facebook/react/bridge/ColorPropConverter.java#L27) to return new color values for color space as longs.

```java

> @ColorLong long p3 = pack(1.0f, 1.0f, 0.0f, 1.0f, ColorSpace.Named.DISPLAY_P3);

Reviewer: Same as above: a factory function might help probably.
Also, you should roughly show how the code will parse and use the value received from JS.

Color opaqueYellow = Color.valueOf(p3);
```

### Docs

Update the [Color Reference](https://github.com/facebook/react-native-website/blob/main/docs/colors.md) to document color function usage in React Native.

## Drawbacks

> There should be no breaking changes for users but the color implementation will be a bit more complicated than before.

Reviewer: We need a little bit more details on why there will be no breaking changes, probably split by platforms. I.e.: for iOS, if the color space is not specified, we will continue using the default `UIColor` with RGB values constructor.

## Alternatives

> We could do nothing and require users to patch package for Display P3 color support. But this is a disappointing developer experience and not a satisfying solution.

Reviewer: This is not what we should talk about in alternatives.
The alternative section is used to discuss alternative implementation/standard.

It is worth investing half a day in a bit of research: there are [other standard](https://webkit.org/blog/6682/improving-color-on-the-web/) for describing wideGamut in JS, for example.
So, why we choose the w3c.

Or, different implementation, for example Swizzling on iOS.

Or why we didn't go for a full wideGamut implementation, affecting all the customers at once, by just changing all the Colors inits.

## Adoption strategy

This is intended to be a non-breaking change with zero impact to existing users. Adoption is entirely opt-in by using the color function in styles to start using display-p3 colors.

## How we teach this

> We should document the inclusion of the color function in the [official color reference](https://reactnative.dev/docs/colors). Developers can then start using it if they choose.

Reviewer: Another thing to mention: 
- parnter with the Release Crew to make sure the new feature is included in a release blog post.
- write a blogpost on the InfiniteRed blog (given that the contributor comes from IR)

## Unresolved questions

> - While Android does support wide color gamut, do [Android View](<https://developer.android.com/reference/android/view/View#setBackgroundColor(int)>)'s actually support it? These methods take `int`s while the Android color reference states wide gamut colors are `long`s.

Reviewer: Answer to the first: no, of course. We would have to update the signatures that receives an int.
This would be a breaking change, so we need to look for overloading those functions :( 

This bit needs to be moved above in the implementation details.

Author: @cipolleschi I'm not seeing an alternative in the Android documentation to set a View's background color to a long though. Looking at https://developer.android.com/training/wide-color-gamut it only mentions images and using OpenGL or Vulkan. It doesn't seem like Android's View supports DisplayP3.

> - Do we need to do additional work to support interpolating colors for animations?

Reviewer: Good question. I have no answer, but we can leave it as a question and I can look to involve someone that has context on this.
